=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

MYDLjE::Guides::Design - make beautiful layouts and templates.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

MYDLjE comes with Elastic CSS framework and the jQuery UI framework bundled. 
Ofcourse they need jQuery which comes with L<Mojolicious>.
Nothing is added or removed, so everything you know so far applies.

Elastic CSS is used for the layout and jQuery UI is used for beauty and form enhacements.

=head1 jQuery UI Themes

You can easily switch themes by just changing the configuration value in 
C<$MOJO_ROOT/conf/local.mydlje.development.yaml>. On production site modify 
C<$MOJO_ROOT/conf/local.mydlje.production.yaml> respectively.

The default is:

    jq_ui_theme: humanity

Change "humanity" to one of the themes which comes with the distribution: I<redmond, smoothness or ui-lightness>. You can add a new theme too by downloading or rolling your own from I<jqueryui.com>. To switch the theme only in the front-end (site) application, change the value in 

C<$MOJO_ROOT/conf/local.mydlje-site.development.yaml>. If the file does not exists, create it.


=head1 SEE ALSO

L<http://docs.jquery.com/Main_Page>, 
L<http://elasticss.com/documentation/>, L<http://jqueryui.com/demos/> 
L<MYDLjE::Guides>, L<MYDLjE::Guides::Devs>, L<MYDLjE::Guides::Admins>

=head1 AUTHOR AND COPYRIGHT

(c) 2011 Красимир Беров L<k.berov@gmail.com>

MYDLjE::Guides by Красимир Беров is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.
Based on a work at github.com.

