=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

MYDLjE::Guides::Devs - know how to contribute code to MYDLjE

=head1 INTRO

MYDLjE is simply a bundle of three L<Mojolicious> applications that work together well.
So I<everything> you know so far about L<Mojolicious> applies.
If you are not sure, go to L<Mojolicious::Guides> and then come back.
You are back? Great! Now we can get to the point.

=head1 FILES STRUCTURE


  $ENV{MOJO_HOME}
      |-- conf
      |-- log
      |-- perl
      |   |-- bin
      |   |-- lib
      |   |-- site
      |   `-- t
      |-- pub
      |   |-- css
      |   |-- dtd
      |   |-- home
      |   `-- js
      |-- templates
      |   |-- cpanel
      |   `-- layouts
      `-- tmp

L<MOJO_HOME|Mojolicious::Guides::Cheatsheet/MOJO_HOME> is the root directory for your L<MYDLjE>-based system. It is auto-discovered when an application starts. 

In the C<conf> directory are the configuration files. They are in YAML format. By default L<YAML::Tiny> is used for parsing, but if you have L<YAML> installed it will be used instead.
See L<YAML::Any> for details.  See L<MYDLjE::Config> for details on how it works. 

In C<conf> you will also find C<mysql.schema.sql>, C<mysql.data.sql> and C<mysql.queries.sql>.
The first is used to initialize the database(create tables add constraints) during L<MYDLjE> installation. The second is parsed and statements in it are executed just after the first. The last file contains commonly used queries and part of queries (C<WHERE> clauses). 
You can add your own queries there.

Note that these C<*.sql> files are well-formed and valid xml files. It turned out to be very convenient to use L<Mojo::DOM> to parse them and in the same time keep most text editors syntax highliting happy.

  -- <query name="write_permissions_sql" params="user_id,user_id"><![CDATA[
    
    (
      (user_id = ? AND permissions LIKE '_rw%')
      OR ( group_id IN (SELECT gid FROM users_groups WHERE uid= ?) 
        AND permissions LIKE '____rw%')
    )
  
  -- ]]></query>

The C<log> folder is for the log files. Note that some early warnings or errors may be logged to the Apache log. 
    #Example:
    cd ~/opt/public_dev/MYDLjE/; tail -n200 -f log/development.log

In C<perl/bin> we keep utility commandline scripts. Everything from Mojo scripts folder is also there. In L<perl/lib> are all the Perl Modules that come bundled with L<MYDLjE>. C<perl/site/bin> and C<perl/site/lib> are intended for your custom, aplication specific code. These folders will not be ever touched if you upgrade MYDLjE.

=head1 PERL MODULES

=head1 XHTML

MYDLjE sends to the browser 100% well formed XML output.

=head1 JavaScript




=head1 SCALABILITY


=head2 Tests

Tests, Perltidy and PerlCritc are run by 
$ENV{MOJO_HOME}/perl/bin/diagnostics.

=head2 Perl Best Practices

To enforce a common perl style we use L<perlcritic>.
The configuration file is $ENV{MOJO_HOME}/.perlcriticrc

=head2 Qunit

TODO: add Qunit
L<http://docs.jquery.com/Qunit>

=head1 PLUGINS

=head2 MYDLjE/Mojolicious Plugins

=head2 Template Plugins

=head2 MYDLjE/Mojolicious Applications






=head1 SEE ALSO

L<MYDLjE::Guides>, L<MYDLjE::Guides::Admins>

=head1 AUTHOR AND COPYRIGHT

(c) 2011 Красимир Беров L<k.berov@gmail.com>

MYDLjE::Guides by Красимир Беров is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.
Based on a work at github.com.

